Experiment No.—1: Preparing the IoT Hardware 

a) Set up Raspberry Pi OS / Arduino IDE 
b) Configure GPIO settings and test basic connectivity 
c) Demonstrate pin layout and onboard peripherals



1. Preparation of MicroSD Card 
 1. Insert the microSD card into the computer. 
 2. Open Raspberry Pi Imager. 
 3. Select: 
o Device: Raspberry Pi 4 
o Operating System: Raspberry Pi OS 
o Storage: Inserted microSD card 
 4. Click Write to flash the OS onto the microSD card. 
 5. After completion, safely remove the SD card. 

2. Booting Raspberry Pi 4 Model B 
1. Insert the flashed microSD card into the Raspberry Pi. 
2. Connect HDMI cable, keyboard, mouse, and power supply. 
3. Power ON the board. 
4. Complete the initial setup wizard: 
o Select country, language, and time zone 
o Connect to Wi-Fi or Ethernet 
o Set username and password 

3. Updating the System 
Open the Terminal and execute: 
sudo apt update 
sudo apt upgrade -y 
Purpose: 
• Updates the package list 
• Installs latest security and system updates 
    
4. Accessing Raspberry Pi Configuration 
To open configuration settings: 
sudo raspi-config 
In the configuration tool: 
• Navigate to System Options to verify hostname and boot settings 
• Navigate to Interface Options to enable required interfaces if needed 
• Finish and exit 
If prompted, reboot the system: 
sudo reboot 

5. Verifying Python Installation 
Check Python version: 
python3 --version 
This confirms that Python is installed and ready for development. 

6. Verifying GPIO Library Availability 
Open Python (Terminal or Thonny) and test: 
import RPi.GPIO as GPIO 
print("GPIO Library Loaded Successfully") 
GPIO.cleanup() 
If no error appears, GPIO is configured properly. 

7. Observing GPIO Pin Layout and Onboard Peripherals 
• Identify the 40-pin GPIO header on the board. 
• Observe the placement of: 
o Power pins (3.3V, 5V) 
o Ground pins 
o GPIO pins 
• Identify onboard peripherals: 
o USB ports 
o HDMI ports 
o Ethernet port 
o Wi-Fi and Bluetooth module 

This confirms familiarity with hardware layout before beginning interfacing experiments.
